---
title: "dotfiles"
date: 2024-04-21T19:55:27.205+0300
draft: true

brief: "my mayhem of system & software configs" 
link: https://github.com/ktnlvr/dotfiles
---

## What are dotfiles?

"Dotfiles" is a general name used to refer to configurations and system setting. It comes from the fact that most of them are hidden files prefixed with a dot, hence the name. This is a config

## What does it solve?

All the config files are software-specific. Neovim has different configuration to alacritty, which has a different configuration to i3, but all of them follow a similar pattern: living in the `~/.config` directory.

A common approach is having a git repository inside the `.config`, having all of your data there. This is perfectly valid, I actually used to do that before. However, issues begin when an app requires a non-standard config location. Case and point - `zsh`. This shell stores its configuration in `$HOME/.zshrc` (like most other shells), so having a config repo no longer works.

Of course, one could store their `.zshrc` in `.config` and source it, but that's kinda combersome and doesn't scale too well.

Symlinks are a natural choice, but how would one organize and automate them? Where would they even lead?

## How does it work?

By using GNU `stow`[^stow] it automates the symlink generation. `stow` is simple: when ran in a directory, it creates symlinks to all files inside it in the parent directory, bingo! Maybe it is easier to see with an example, imagine the following `$HOME` directory:

```
-- The actual configs
.dotfiles/
  .zshrc
  .config/
    i3/
      config
    nvim/
      init.lua

-- Symlinks generated by GNU stow
.zshrc        -> .dotfiles/.zshrc
.config/
  i3/
    config    -> .dotfiles/.config/i3/config
  nvim/
    init.lua  -> .dotfiles/.config

-- The rest of the $HOME is intact
```

## How to install?

The `install.sh` is in the root of the project, but can be done with the `curl`/`wget` command in [`README.md`](https://github.com/ktnlvr/dotfiles/?tab=readme-ov-file#installation).

## How does it treat my existing system?

Stow markets itself as stable and safe[^stow-safe], which it seems to be true. The program was first created in 1993, so it is almost certainly more robust than my `install.sh`.

Before running it will check that both required dependencies are installed (`stow` and `git`). It isn't too critical, but helps avoid cryptic error messages.

One could possibly worry that stow will override their existing configurations. Luckily, when ran with the `--adopt` option, all the configuration files that already exist will be copied into the `.dotfiles` directory overriding the downloaded config. This flag is the only destructivee one, since if you don't have your downloaded configs in a git repo, the changes will be lost. Be careful!

In case some of the files are already symlinked, `stow` will issue a warning for each and not procede.

A defensive measure I put in is updates. If someone installs the `.dotfiles` directory if it already exists, the changes are pulled and then applied.

Otherwise, if something goes very wrong all commands have early exits. It won't try and `stow` a non-existent directory. Generally, the script is rather safe.

[^stow]: [GNU `stow`](https://www.gnu.org/software/stow/) "a symlink farm manager" (whatever that is) 
[^stow-safe]: "substantially simpler and safer", "stow will never delete any files, directories, or links", source: [`man`](https://linux.die.net/man/8/stow)
